# Stencil skeleton evaluation

The stencil skeleton is a particular data-parallel computation in which
data dependence pattern is implemented by means of inter-worker
communications.

A stencil is a gather in which all memory addresses used for reads are
expressed as offsets relative to the location of a collection of
outputs. Suppose we have an input array A, an output array B, and a set
of integer offsets P. Then for every index k in the output array, we
read from every input in A given by k + p for every p in P. Note that
the index values in P may be multidimensional if the inputs and outputs
are multidimensional. A stencil accesses a regular neighborhood of the
input for each output.

The stencil pattern appears in a number of applications, but most
notably in image processing and simulation. A wide variety of linear and
non-linear image processing operations are specified using stencils,
including linear convolution and non-linear noise reduction. Explicit
solutions to partial differential equations, used in simulation and
seismic reconstruction as well as in image processing, use iterative
applications of stencil operations.

# Implementation notes

The implementation of the skeleton is entirely in Python and MPI. I have
used mpi4py package and numpy for the matrix representation. The tests
were run on top of a cluster of multicores machines using MPICHv1.
Please refer to the official page of [mpi4py](http://mpi4py.scipy.org)
package for further information regarding how to set up the proper
testing environment.
